Protocol compliance checklist.

MUST directives

3. Protocol and Packet Format

   Any NAT-PMP
   gateway implementing this version of the protocol, receiving a
   packet with a version number other than 0, MUST return result code 1
   (Unsupported Version).

3.2 Determining the Public Address

   If the result code is non-zero, the value of Public IP Address is
   undefined (MUST be set to zero on transmission, and MUST be ignored
   on reception).

   The NAT gateway MUST fill in the "Seconds Since Start of Epoch" field
   with the time elapsed since its port mapping table was initialized on
   startup or reset for any other reason

   Upon receiving the response packet, the client MUST check the source
   IP address, and silently discard the packet if the address is not the
   address of the gateway to which the request was sent.

3.2.1 Announcing Address Changes

   When the public IP address of the NAT changes, the NAT gateway MUST
   send a gratuitous response to the link-local multicast address
   224.0.0.1, port 5351 with the packet format above to notify clients
   of the new public IP address.

   Upon receiving a gratuitous address change announcement packet,
   the client MUST check the source IP address, and silently discard
   the packet if the address is not the address of the client's
   current configured gateway.

3.3 Creating a Mapping

   The Reserved field MUST be set to zero on transmission and MUST
   be ignored on reception.

   The 'x' in the OP field MUST match what the client requested. Some
   NAT gateways are incapable of creating a UDP port mapping without
   also creating a corresponding TCP port mapping, and vice versa, and
   these gateways MUST NOT implement NAT Port Mapping Protocol until
   this deficiency is fixed. A NAT gateway which implements this
   protocol MUST be able to create TCP-only and UDP-only port mappings. 

   While a NAT gateway MUST NOT automatically create mappings for TCP
   when the client requests UDP, and vice versa, the NAT gateway MUST
   reserve the companion port so the same client can choose to map it
   in the future. For example, if a client requests to map TCP port 80,
   as long as the client maintains the lease for that TCP port mapping,
   another client with a different IP address MUST NOT be able to
   successfully acquire the mapping for UDP port 80.

   The client normally requests the public port matching the private
   port. If that public port is not available, the NAT gateway MUST
   return a public port that is available or return an error code if
   no ports are available.

   The source address of the packet MUST be used for the private address
   in the mapping.

   The NAT gateway MUST fill in the "Seconds Since Start of Epoch" field
   with the time elapsed since its port mapping table was initialized on
   startup or reset for any other reason (see Section 3.6 "Seconds Since
   Start of Epoch").

   Upon receiving the response packet, the client MUST check the source
   IP address, and silently discard the packet if the address is not the
   address of the gateway to which the request was sent.

3.4 Destroying a Mapping

   A mapping may be destroyed in a variety of ways. If a client fails
   to renew a mapping, then when its lifetime expires the mapping MUST
   be automatically deleted.

   A client requests explicit
   deletion of a mapping by sending a message to the NAT gateway
   requesting the mapping, with the Requested Lifetime in Seconds set
   to 0. The requested public port MUST be set to zero by the client
   on sending, and MUST be ignored by the gateway on reception.

   When a mapping is destroyed successfully as a result of the client
   explicitly requesting the deletion, the NAT gateway MUST send a
   response packet which is formatted as defined in section 3.3
   "Creating a Mapping". The response MUST contain a result code of 0,
   the private port as indicated in the deletion request, a public port
   of 0, and a lifetime of 0. The NAT gateway MUST respond to a request
   to destroy a mapping that does not exist as if the request were
   successful. This is because of the case where the acknowledgement is
   lost, and the client retransmits its request to delete the mapping. 
   In this case the second request to delete the mapping MUST return the
   same response packet as the first request.

   If the deletion request was unsuccessful, the response MUST contain a
   non-zero result code and the requested mapping; the lifetime is
   undefined (MUST be set to zero on transmission, and MUST be ignored
   on reception). If the client attempts to delete a port mapping which
   was manually assigned by some kind of configuration tool, the NAT
   gateway MUST respond with a 'Not Authorized' error, result code 2.

   A client can request the explicit deletion of all its UDP or TCP
   mappings by sending the same deletion request to the NAT gateway
   with public port, private port, and lifetime set to 0. A client MAY
   choose to do this when it first acquires a new IP address in order to
   protect itself from port mappings that were performed by a previous
   owner of the IP address. After receiving such a deletion request,
   the gateway MUST delete all its UDP or TCP port mappings (depending
   on the opcode). The gateway responds to such a deletion request with
   a response as described above, with the private port set to zero. If
   the gateway is unable to delete a port mapping, for example, because
   the mapping was manually configured by the administrator, the gateway
   MUST still delete as many port mappings as possible, but respond with
   a non-zero result code. The exact result code to return depends on
   the cause of the failure. If the gateway is able to successfully
   delete all port mappings as requested, it MUST respond with a result
   code of 0.

3.5 Result Codes

   Clients MUST be able to properly handle result codes not defined in
   this document. Undefined results codes MUST be treated as fatal
   errors of the request.

3.6 Seconds Since Start of Epoch

   If the NAT gateway resets or loses the
   state of its port mapping table, due to reboot, power failure, or any
   other reason, it MUST reset its epoch time and begin counting SSSOE
   from 0 again.

   If the SSSOE in the newly received packet is
   less than the client's conservative estimate by more than one second,
   then the client concludes that the NAT gateway has undergone a reboot
   or other loss of port mapping state, and the client MUST immediately
   renew all its active port mapping leases as described in Section 3.7
   "Recreating Mappings On NAT Gateway Reboot".

3.7 Recreating Mappings On NAT Gateway Reboot

   When the NAT gateway powers on or clears its port mapping
   state as the result of a configuration change, it MUST reset the
   epoch time and re-announce its IP address as described in Section
   3.2.1 "Announcing Address Changes".

   When a client renews its port mappings as the result of receiving
   a packet where the "Seconds since start of epoch" field (SSSOE)
   indicates that a reboot or similar loss of state has occurred,
   the client MUST first delay by a random amount of time selected
   with uniform random distribution in the range 0 to 5 seconds, and
   then send its first port mapping request.

3.8 NAT Gateways with NAT Function Disabled

   A network device that is capable of NAT (and NAT-PMP), but is
   currently configured not to perform that function, (e.g. it is
   acting as a traditional IP router, forwarding packets without
   modifying them), MUST NOT respond to NAT-PMP requests from clients,
   or send spontaneous NAT-PMP address-change announcements.


SHOULD directives

3. Protocol and Packet Format
   This protocol SHOULD only be used when the client determines that
   its primary IPv4 address is in one of the private IP address ranges
   defined in "Address Allocation for Private Internets" [RFC 1918].
   This includes the address ranges 10/8, 172.16/12, and 192.168/16.

3.1 Requests and Reponses
   Clients machines SHOULD NOT issue multiple requests
   simultaneously in parallel. If a client needs to perform multiple
   requests (e.g. on boot, wake from sleep, network connection, etc.)
   it SHOULD queue them and issue them serially one at a time.

   If no
   NAT-PMP response is received from the gateway after 250ms, the client
   retransmits its request and waits 500ms. The client SHOULD repeat
   this process with the interval between attempts doubling each time.
   If, after sending its 9th attempt (and then waiting for 64 seconds),
   the client has still received no response, then it SHOULD conclude
   that this gateway does not support NAT Port Mapping Protocol and
   MAY log an error message indicating this fact.

3.2.1 Announcing Address Changes

   To accommodate packet loss, the
   NAT gateway SHOULD multicast 10 address change notifications.
   The interval between the first two notifications SHOULD be 250ms,
   and the interval between each subsequent notification SHOULD double.

3.3 Creating a Mapping

   The Requested Public Port SHOULD usually be set to the same value as
   the local Private Port, or zero if the client has no preference for
   what port is assigned.

   After sending the port mapping request, the client then waits for the
   NAT gateway to respond. If after 250ms, the gateway doesn't respond,
   the client SHOULD re-issue its request as described above in Section
   3.1 "Requests and Responses".

   The NAT gateway SHOULD NOT accept mapping requests destined to the
   NAT gateway's public IP address or received on its public network
   interface.

   The Port Mapping Lifetime is an unsigned integer in seconds. The NAT
   gateway MAY reduce the lifetime from what the client requested. The
   NAT gateway SHOULD NOT offer a lease lifetime greater than that
   requested by the client.

   The client SHOULD begin trying to renew the mapping halfway to expiry
   time, like DHCP. The renewal packet should look exactly the same as
   a request packet, except that the client SHOULD set the requested
   public port to what the NAT gateway previously mapped, not what the
   client originally requested.

3.4 Destroying a Mapping

   When a mapping is destroyed as a result of its lifetime expiring or
   for any other reason, if the NAT gateway's internal state indicates
   that there are still active TCP connections traversing that now-
   defunct mapping, then the NAT gateway SHOULD send appropriately-
   constructed TCP RST (reset) packets both to the local client and to
   the remote peer on the Internet to terminate that TCP connection.

3.5 Result Codes

   If the result code is non-zero, the format of the packet following
   the result code may be truncated. For example, if the client sends a
   request to the server with an opcode of 17 and the server does not
   recognize that opcode, the server SHOULD respond with a message where
   the opcode is 17 + 128 and the result code is 5 (opcode not
   supported). Since the server does not understand the format of
   opcode 17, it may not know what to place after the result code. In
   some cases, relevant data may follow the opcode to identify the
   operation that failed. For example, a client may request a mapping
   but that mapping may fail due to resource exhaustion. The server
   SHOULD respond with the result code to indicate resource exhaustion
   (4) followed by the requested port mapping so the client may identify
   which operation failed.

3.7 Recreating Mappings On NAT Gateway Reboot

   Reception of this packet [address change announcement]  where
   time has apparently gone backwards serves as a hint to clients
   on the network that they SHOULD immediately send renewal packets
   (to immediately recreate their mappings) instead of waiting until
   the originally scheduled time for those renewals.

3.8 NAT Gateways with NAT Function Disabled

   If a network device not currently acting in the role of NAT gateway
   receives UDP packets addressed to port 5351, it SHOULD respond
   immediately with an "ICMP Port Unreachable" message

4.3.2 NATs with Multiple Public IP Addresses

   If a NAT maps private addresses to multiple public addresses,
   then it SHOULD pick one of those addresses as the one it will
   support for inbound connections, and for the purposes of this
   protocol it SHOULD act as if that address were its only address.

5. Security Considerations

   Since allowing incoming connections is often a policy decision, any
   NAT gateway implementing this protocol SHOULD have an administrative
   mechanism to disable it.


MAY directives

3.1 Requests and Responses

   If, after sending its 9th attempt (and then waiting for 64 seconds),
   the client has still received no response, then it SHOULD conclude
   that this gateway does not support NAT Port Mapping Protocol and
   MAY log an error message indicating this fact.

   As a performance optimization the client MAY record this information
   [unavailability of NAT-PMP service]
   and use it to suppress further attempts to use NAT-PMP

3.3 Creating a Mapping

   The Port Mapping Lifetime is an unsigned integer in seconds. The NAT
   gateway MAY reduce the lifetime from what the client requested. The
   NAT gateway SHOULD NOT offer a lease lifetime greater than that
   requested by the client.

3.4 Destroying a Mapping

   In the common case where the gateway
   device is a combined DHCP server and NAT gateway, when a client's
   DHCP address lease expires, the gateway device MAY automatically
   delete any mappings belonging to that client.

   A client MAY also send an explicit packet to request deletion of a
   mapping that is no longer needed.

   A client can request the explicit deletion of all its UDP or TCP
   mappings by sending the same deletion request to the NAT gateway
   with public port, private port, and lifetime set to 0. A client MAY
   choose to do this when it first acquires a new IP address in order to
   protect itself from port mappings that were performed by a previous
   owner of the IP address.

3.7 Recreating Mappings On NAT Gateway Reboot

   The NAT gateway MAY store mappings in persistent storage so when it
   is powered off or rebooted, it remembers the port mapping state of
   the network.


RECOMMENDED directives

3.3 Creating a Mapping

   The RECOMMENDED Port Mapping Lifetime is 3600 seconds.

# vim:sw=3:et
